Okay, let's get started.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Welcome back to Informatics one cognitive science.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I'm sorry, where in this room has a nice organ.
NOTE CONF
Maybe I can use this in a lecture on music
cognition.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is obviously a church.
Uh, Thomas Bayes was a reverend.
NOTE CONF
We will encounter Thomas Bayes later in the course.
Anyway, um, so today's lecture is about cognitive science generally.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's it's going to provide an introduction to two
important concepts.
NOTE CONF
And, um, the underlying readings.
Let me quickly explain those.
NOTE CONF
Um, as you've probably seen, uh, there's three readings.
The first one is Aston Martin.
NOTE CONF
This is a paper arguing for the value of computational
modelling, and this will form the basis of the first
NOTE CONF
part of today.
And then Haz is.
NOTE CONF
I don't want to say a blog post, but it's
a summary of one of the books and it's making
NOTE CONF
the case for cognitive gadgets.
And we'll come back to what that is.
NOTE CONF
Here the interesting point is about innate ness.
So we'll talk about innate ness a little bit.
NOTE CONF
And then I'll start introducing language, which will occupy us
for a few more lectures in the coming weeks, and
NOTE CONF
in particular from the perspective of ineptness.
This paper is a bit more of a long read
NOTE CONF
and more advanced read, so it's optional, but it talks
about the existence of a critical period for language, so
NOTE CONF
I'll touch upon that as well in this lecture.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So cognitive modelling, cognitive technology.
And then about language.
NOTE CONF
That's sort of the game plan for today.
Just to revise quickly.
NOTE CONF
Last time we talked about cognitive science in general and
in particular, we talked about it being the signs of
NOTE CONF
mental representations and processes.
So representation representations are things that store information in a
NOTE CONF
certain format, typically in a structured format.
And processes are algorithms that operate on those representations.
NOTE CONF
So these things all go on in our minds, in
our brains, in some form or another.
NOTE CONF
And that's essentially what we're trying to study here.
So and these processes, they they can transform sensory information,
NOTE CONF
you know, raw signal that comes in from the retina
for example, into representation.
NOTE CONF
Or they can just transform representation into other representations, or
they can take representations and turn them into actions.
NOTE CONF
It can be very small actions, for example eye movements
or bigger ones.
NOTE CONF
Walking.
Talking.
NOTE CONF
Moving around in the world.
And we have seen this conundrum here about pizzas.
NOTE CONF
So let's assume you either get two 12 inch pizzas
or one 18 inch pizza for the same price.
NOTE CONF
Which one do you choose?
And intuitively, if you ask people, a lot of them
NOTE CONF
choose the two 12 inch pizzas.
Pizzas.
NOTE CONF
And Aston Martin that's the the reading, one of the
readings.
NOTE CONF
They talk about that in a lot more detail.
However, you can easily convince yourself by working out the
NOTE CONF
area.
So let's assume pizza.
NOTE CONF
We can abstract it and treat it as a circle.
So work out the area of the circle and the
NOTE CONF
two pizzas is actually a worse deal than the one
large pizza, because the area is smaller.
NOTE CONF
And so that is interesting.
This is obviously something that we would like to explain.
NOTE CONF
And Gaston Martin argued that modelling is something that helps
us explain that.
NOTE CONF
How so?
So we've already implicitly done a tiny little bit of
NOTE CONF
modelling by computing the radius.
And that's what we see here.
NOTE CONF
This is the formula for the radius.
Call it phi I.
NOTE CONF
Where for for the area.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Call it phi I.
Where n is the number of pizzas.
NOTE CONF
Pi is the constant pi and r squared is the
radius of the pizza squared.
NOTE CONF
That's just the formula of the area of a circle,
right.
NOTE CONF
Times n because we have n pizzas.
And then we can assume a decision is made based
NOTE CONF
on the um based on the area.
So call this decision function.
NOTE CONF
Omega takes the areas of two pizzas, Phi I and
Phi J, and returns the one with a larger area.
NOTE CONF
So if Phi I.
Is bigger than Phi J, then we return I the
NOTE CONF
the first pizza.
Otherwise we return J the second pizza.
NOTE CONF
So this is a very, very simple way of formalising
the intuition here.
NOTE CONF
And of course we can do one better by writing
a little bit of Python and actually implementing this decision
NOTE CONF
function.
First of all implementing the computation here computation of the
NOTE CONF
area.
Then here we apply this to two particular pizzas, the
NOTE CONF
two 12 inch ones and the the 18 inch one.
And then this is our decision rule right.
NOTE CONF
And just decides whether the amount of food, the area
of the food is bigger in the first case, in
NOTE CONF
the second case.
And so this has the advantage of making precise what
NOTE CONF
our assumptions are.
Right?
NOTE CONF
We assume that people take the area to decide.
We assume that they have a way of computing the
NOTE CONF
area, or at least estimating the area.
We also assume that that's the only thing they decide
NOTE CONF
on, right?
This decision function doesn't have access to anything else.
NOTE CONF
For example, I don't know the amount of topping might
be interesting, the thickness, the weight and so on.
NOTE CONF
There might in principle, there might be lots of other
things.
NOTE CONF
But by by formalising and ultimately implementing this idea of
this way of pizza selection, we have to make our
NOTE CONF
assumptions explicit.
So this is obviously a trivial example of very, very
NOTE CONF
simple and uninteresting example, but it illustrates this general point.
And uh, according to Gaston Martin.
NOTE CONF
So first of all, what is cognitive modelling?
It takes a verbal description.
NOTE CONF
So I told you well people compare the area or
people just compare the number of pizzas.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Intuitively maybe they make this mistake and that's why they
NOTE CONF
prefer the two pizzas even though the area is small.
So there's a verbal description which we have formalised to
NOTE CONF
an extent to make it implementable.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So this is the formalisation which is just a very
small bit of mass.
NOTE CONF
And then this is an implementation which we can essentially
read off of the the mathematical formulation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this process is uh is called computational modelling.
NOTE CONF
And here is a typo.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So this is, this is supposed to say forces us
to make a theory explicit and to specify its scope,
NOTE CONF
its assumptions, and its computational repercussions.
Um, so the theory here is people use the area
NOTE CONF
to decide or people use the number of pizzas to
decide.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Those two different competing theories.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and but by implementing this I need to specify
the scope.
NOTE CONF
So it only looks at pizzas it doesn't look at
I don't know, it only looks at round pizzas.
NOTE CONF
If you have square pizzas, it no longer works, for
example.
NOTE CONF
And also the computational repercussions in this case.
This is a very simple piece of code.
NOTE CONF
But more complicated models, for example, might require a lot
of computation, a lot of memory, a lot of auxiliary
NOTE CONF
assumptions, and so on.
All of these I need to make explicit if I
NOTE CONF
want to implement my theory.
And ultimately this will improve the theory by uncovering aspects
NOTE CONF
that I've not specified very well.
Right in the verbal statement.
NOTE CONF
For example, the verbal statement here doesn't necessarily say that
the pizza has to be a circle, but if I
NOTE CONF
make this explicit and I write down the formula of
the area of the circle, then I need to make
NOTE CONF
this assumption clear and explicit.
If anything is ambiguous, then then And formalising the theory
NOTE CONF
will force me to to resolve the ambiguity.
It stops us from just testing hypotheses that seem intuitively
NOTE CONF
interesting, right?
So without having a clear theory of why this is
NOTE CONF
the right hypothesis.
So it forces us to work in a theoretical manner.
NOTE CONF
And that basically constrains the search space, right?
Because if we just test arbitrary hypotheses, then we might
NOTE CONF
end up, um, you know, going down a dead end
and we can't do all the possible experiments that we
NOTE CONF
can think of.
But if we have a theory, then the theory will
NOTE CONF
tell us what kind of experiments are useful in the
context of that theory.
NOTE CONF
And ultimately, this will allow us to generate new hypotheses,
compare existing theories, generate new hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
So this is the high level idea.
And Aston Martin they break break this down.
NOTE CONF
So cognitive modelling is a multi-step process in their in
their conceptualisation.
NOTE CONF
You start with a framework which is sort of a
meta theory, a theory of theories.
NOTE CONF
Then within that framework you formulate a particular theory, for
example, of pizza selection.
NOTE CONF
Then you specify this so you make it more explicit.
We did this by providing a mathematical formula.
NOTE CONF
You implement this.
We did this by providing a bit of Python code.
NOTE CONF
And then this will generate hypotheses.
So for example it will tell us that.
NOTE CONF
The it's the area rather than the number of pizzas
that's important or.
NOTE CONF
Or the weight or something like that.
And then that's a hypothesis we can test.
NOTE CONF
So for example what will happen if we have two
small pizzas and one big pizzas.
NOTE CONF
But the area is the same, or the area of
the two small pizzas is bigger.
NOTE CONF
Would people then select the two small pizzas?
Right.
NOTE CONF
So it generates hypotheses like this which we can test.
We can run an experiment.
NOTE CONF
Ask, ask people what kind of pizzas they prefer.
And this will give us data.
NOTE CONF
And then as you can see there's errors in both
directions right.
NOTE CONF
So we start from the framework then go down through
theory specification and so on to data.
NOTE CONF
Once we have new data we climb back up and
revise our hypothesis depending on what the data says, maybe
NOTE CONF
modify our implementation and our specification.
Ultimately, if the data doesn't conform with our theory, we
NOTE CONF
need to we need to change our theory.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's a circular process operating in both directions.
So to explain this a little bit more what the
NOTE CONF
individual components are.
So starting with the framework up here.
NOTE CONF
So framework is basically a conceptual system and is a
meta theory that allows us to, to generate, uh, more
NOTE CONF
generate uh, models and theories for a range of different
phenomena.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see a number of frameworks in this course.
So we'll actually start with what used to be called
NOTE CONF
connectionism.
It's now called neural networks or deep learning.
NOTE CONF
Um and that is very, very general mechanism for modelling
cognitive processes.
NOTE CONF
And it has been applied all over the place from
language to vision to more to control lots of cognitive
NOTE CONF
domains.
And that is not a theory or a model.
NOTE CONF
That is a framework.
It's a system for building models.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the theory is a particular, uh, a particular instantiation
NOTE CONF
of this framework for example, to model food selection or
to model language acquisition, or to model object recognition, whatever
NOTE CONF
cognitive, uh, whatever cognitive process you're interested in, you build
a theory.
NOTE CONF
And initially this is verbally specified, right?
You just talk about it.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe you have a diagram with boxes and arrows
like we saw last time.
NOTE CONF
So the theory is at that level, it is not
formal yet, but it's within a given framework.
NOTE CONF
And then based on the theory, which can be, as
I said, described in various ways, could be mathematical, natural
NOTE CONF
language diagrams and so on, and basically tries to explain
the phenomena that you're trying to explain, to explain, say,
NOTE CONF
object recognition.
And the specification then is the formal description of the
NOTE CONF
system.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So you have your theory, you specify it formally.
And that means you also delineate the scope of what
NOTE CONF
you do.
And that's quite important.
NOTE CONF
For example, back to our pizza example.
This only works for round pizzas, right?
NOTE CONF
We said this because the formula is specified as the
area of a circle.
NOTE CONF
So it is important to also say what your theory
doesn't do right.
NOTE CONF
So you have a theory of language acquisition for example.
It doesn't explain the acquisition of numbers or the acquisition
NOTE CONF
of.
Colour systems or something like that, or the acquisition of
NOTE CONF
object categories.
Or maybe you have a very general theory that explains
NOTE CONF
all these things, but you need to make clear what
the limits are, what the boundaries are, and what's outside
NOTE CONF
the realm of your theory.
So that's part of the process of specifying it.
NOTE CONF
So the theory, relevant claims theory irrelevant additional assumptions, things
that is outside the realm of your theory and inside
NOTE CONF
the realm of your theory and so on.
And this is very important because it also constrains the
NOTE CONF
space of, of possible computational models.
And that's the next step, right?
NOTE CONF
Once you have your theory and you have specified it
sufficiently in sufficient detail, then you can build an implementation.
NOTE CONF
This is often software code, but it doesn't have to
be.
NOTE CONF
You could also build a physical model in some.
In some cases that's possible.
NOTE CONF
Maybe in robotics if you're interested in particular motor control
systems and so on.
NOTE CONF
But most of the time it's going to be a
piece of software.
NOTE CONF
And then from that you can derive a hypothesis.
So a hypothesis is a testable statement right.
NOTE CONF
It's something that you can potentially measure and find out
whether it's true or not.
NOTE CONF
So an example I gave with the pizzas was that
if you make if you have people compare two small
NOTE CONF
pizzas and one big pizzas, if you make the small
pizzas large enough so that the area is the same
NOTE CONF
or bigger than the area of the big pizza, then
they should choose the small pizzas.
NOTE CONF
So it should flip at some point.
And this is something you can test.
NOTE CONF
You can get people to compare 12 inch and 18
inch, 14 inch, 18 and 16 inch and 18 inch
NOTE CONF
and so on and see when do their decisions flip
from big small bits or the big pizza or the
NOTE CONF
other way around?
Okay, that's a hypothesis that this this happens.
NOTE CONF
And then I need to, uh, I need to get
data.
NOTE CONF
In this case, I can just give people I don't
have to even have to give people pizzas, right?
NOTE CONF
I can just get them to compare pictures if they
are to scale.
NOTE CONF
Here's a bunch of pictures of pizzas.
Which ones would you choose?
NOTE CONF
And then I count how often do people choose one
option over the other?
NOTE CONF
And that is the the data.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at another example.
And this is sort of already transitioning slowly towards language
NOTE CONF
acquisition.
And we'll come back to that next week.
NOTE CONF
So let.
And as I said this is a the process works
NOTE CONF
in both directions right.
So often you actually don't start with the framework or
NOTE CONF
the theory.
You start with the data.
NOTE CONF
So let's start down here and let's assume we have
observed some data.
NOTE CONF
So this is about children learning learning language.
And they make lots of mistakes.
NOTE CONF
And we'll come back to that.
And these mistakes are actually very interesting scientifically.
NOTE CONF
So let's assume the child says I eat it the
Cheerios okay.
NOTE CONF
It is a irregular verb in English.
The child at this point seems to assume that it's
NOTE CONF
regular, and that is already a hypothesis, right?
If we say it assumes that it is regular, then
NOTE CONF
it should say sorry.
He or she should say, eat it.
NOTE CONF
A lot more than eight, maybe.
Occasionally they use the correct form.
NOTE CONF
Probably heard it's a high frequency verb, so maybe they've
heard the correct form.
NOTE CONF
So that is our hypothesis in this case.
And we can implement this very easily.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Just sort of one line.
NOTE CONF
One line of code.
We take a verb and we add ed to it.
NOTE CONF
This is of course, the beauty of assuming all verbs
are regular.
NOTE CONF
It's a very, very simple process.
And here the, the, uh, the assumption is the child
NOTE CONF
doesn't know about irregular verbs yet.
They just add ed if they want to form the
NOTE CONF
past tense.
So that would be a more that would be a
NOTE CONF
specification.
Specification.
NOTE CONF
Um, the specification is more abstract as you can see
here.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't And include a function definition or anything like
that.
NOTE CONF
It's a verbal specification of what's going on.
And the theory overall is that.
NOTE CONF
And again, we'll come back to that is that language
works in terms of words and rules.
NOTE CONF
So words are things like 8 or 8.
And rules are things that stick these words together to
NOTE CONF
form more complex words like eat, eat or to build
sentences.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that is a theory that doesn't only work for
NOTE CONF
past tense, right?
That is a more general theory that would also work
NOTE CONF
for, I don't know, parol formation or compounding and other
linguistic phenomena.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the theory behind that.
NOTE CONF
And the general framework is one where we assume that
cognitive processes, they manipulate symbols things like rules and discrete
NOTE CONF
entities like like verbs and so on.
An alternative would be, for example, the neural networks, where
NOTE CONF
we just assume it's all basically vectors of numbers and
even words and rules and so on are encoded as
NOTE CONF
vectors of numbers.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So these are two competing frameworks that we could use
to explain this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we have our framework words and rules as a
NOTE CONF
theory specification.
And then the implementation.
NOTE CONF
And then of course we can go down the hierarchy
again.
NOTE CONF
So if we go back so we start from the
data and gone all the way up to the framework.
NOTE CONF
And now we can use this framework theory, specification and
implementation to generate a new hypothesis that we can hopefully
NOTE CONF
test by getting some more data.
As I said it's it's an iterative process.
NOTE CONF
So hypotheses Then let's start with, uh, other irregular verbs.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So C should become seed rather than saw and helped.
And help should become help.
NOTE CONF
Help is regular right.
So we have rather than helping which would be in
NOTE CONF
a in irregular form.
Like take taken.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we have made two claims here.
NOTE CONF
Right.
The first one is that this is not just for
NOTE CONF
the single verb here.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Remember we've only observed a single verb here.
But we are saying this applies to other verbs as
NOTE CONF
well.
And it also applies to regular verbs, which kind of
NOTE CONF
makes sense, but it's something we haven't tested yet.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And now we can get data.
We can, I don't know, record children while they speak.
NOTE CONF
We can check different ages.
Children normally start to speak at the age of two,
NOTE CONF
approximately so we can record two year olds, three year
olds, four year olds and see if that makes a
NOTE CONF
difference to our hypothesis.
We can look at irregular verbs, irregular verbs.
NOTE CONF
We can see if they understand them versus generate them.
There's quite a lot of possibilities then for getting data.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I've talked for long enough.
We'll have a quick quiz to look at some of
NOTE CONF
the concepts I've introduced.
So if you haven't scanned this yet give you a
NOTE CONF
few minutes to scan it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's the same barcode.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is just a very simple question to check
whether you're paying attention.
NOTE CONF
So, um, we have seen the pizza example, and we
have seen a little Python program that decides whether 1
NOTE CONF
or 2 pizzas should be preferred.
Is this a framework, an implementation or a specification?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So please vote now.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's see.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
Implementation.
NOTE CONF
Most of you got that right.
Then a t test.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone know what the t test is?
I can quickly explain.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
A few people don't know.
NOTE CONF
A t test is a statistical test that is used
in psychology to decide whether two meanings are the same.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume I do this pizza experiment, and I count
how often people take two pizzas.
NOTE CONF
How often do they take one pizza?
Then I get two to count two averages, and the
NOTE CONF
t test will tell me whether those two averages are
reliably different or whether they're the same.
NOTE CONF
So it's a statistical test used to analyse data.
And now in the guessed and margin framework is the
NOTE CONF
t test the hypothesis?
Is it data or is it a specification.
NOTE CONF
What do you think?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Data is the correct answer, though about half of you
NOTE CONF
are unsure.
Um, it is interesting because it's not raw data, right?
NOTE CONF
It's not individual observations or individual measurements.
It's some statistic you've computed on the data, but it's
NOTE CONF
still data.
It doesn't.
NOTE CONF
The T test is theoretically neutral, right?
It doesn't impose any models or theories or hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's why it would count as data even though
NOTE CONF
it is not the raw observation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Last one.
So we have looked a little bit at irregular verbs.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume we look at plural formation, which also is
interesting in English because it has some regular some irregular
NOTE CONF
form.
Dog dogs.
NOTE CONF
But sheep.
Sheep.
NOTE CONF
Um, if we have a verbal description, something like you
add an s to the end of the noun.
NOTE CONF
Would that be a hypothesis, a theory or a specification?
It's a verbal description of how people form the plural
NOTE CONF
of English nouns.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Matt.
Interesting.
NOTE CONF
So about an equal even split between theory and specification.
I think it's a specification because it is sufficiently it's
NOTE CONF
sufficiently formal, but it is not theoretical in the sense
that it is not general enough.
NOTE CONF
And it also doesn't, for example, distinguish between regular and
irregular verbs.
NOTE CONF
So it's a specification.
It's not a theory.
NOTE CONF
Yet you would expect the theory to be more general.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That is it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Before we move on to cognitive technology, is there any
any questions at this point?
NOTE CONF
No.
Everyone is happy or too shy.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's let's look at cognitive technology.
NOTE CONF
So this is a bit of a strange term.
So it's not something like I don't know, a laptop
NOTE CONF
or a mobile phone.
Um the underlying reading is, is by Cecilia Hayes who's
NOTE CONF
a psychologist mostly to do with uh, she's mostly looked
at evolutionary psychology.
NOTE CONF
Um, she calls the same thing cognitive gadgets.
So I will use these two terms interchangeably.
NOTE CONF
Cognitive gadget, cognitive technology.
Um, and her starting point is one where people in
NOTE CONF
the past, psychologists in the past have talked about instincts
a lot.
NOTE CONF
So Steven Pinker, you know, well-known psychologist with lots of
popular books, talks about the language instinct.
NOTE CONF
And by that he means that language is something that's
innate, that is, uh, I don't know, like other instincts,
NOTE CONF
the I don't know the sucking reflex that the a
newborns have, right?
NOTE CONF
They're born and immediately they start to suck.
There's not something they need to learn.
NOTE CONF
So it must be innate.
And this is called an instinct.
NOTE CONF
And he says language is an instinct like that.
And people have argued for all sorts of instincts, the
NOTE CONF
instinct to imitate and to learn by imitation.
The instinct of mind reading.
NOTE CONF
Mind reading here just means that you figure out other
people's mental states from their behaviour, from their facial expressions,
NOTE CONF
and so on.
And this has been a mainstay of psychology, in particular
NOTE CONF
of what's called evolutionary psychology, which assumes that our cognitive
processes, our cognitive capabilities are evolved and basically haven't changed
NOTE CONF
since, I don't know, the Stone age or something like
that, and also then explains how our cognitive capacities don't
NOTE CONF
quite fit the modern world because they're actually Stone age
and so on.
NOTE CONF
That's another story.
But the main claim is that it's all based on
NOTE CONF
instincts, and these instincts allow us to acquire certain cognitive
capabilities, and the instincts are innate, right?
NOTE CONF
They are not learned.
They're there from birth.
NOTE CONF
However, and Hayes has quite a number of examples, for
example, to do with imitation learning.
NOTE CONF
There's increasing evidence that these abilities are actually not innate,
and they're also much less general than previously thought.
NOTE CONF
Also, they vary from culture to culture, which again mitigates
against the claim that the innate and so on.
NOTE CONF
So this evidence for innate is becoming increasingly tenuous.
And instead, she argues, and certain psychologists have argued this
NOTE CONF
for a long time, that all you need is a
general learning mechanism.
NOTE CONF
And with that general learning mechanism, you can then acquire
all these different things.
NOTE CONF
They don't need to be innate.
Language doesn't need to be innate.
NOTE CONF
Some aspects of language we know are not innate.
For example, reading.
NOTE CONF
Reading is historically very young.
It's about 5000 6000 years old reading and writing.
NOTE CONF
So this cannot be the result of evolution, right?
Biological evolution.
NOTE CONF
It cannot be innate.
And why not assume that the rest of language is
NOTE CONF
also not innate?
So and this is also theoretically driven.
NOTE CONF
So people who've used, for example, neural network modelling, they
traditionally argue against ineptness because a neural network of course
NOTE CONF
is one of these powerful general learning mechanisms.
So they want to use that to explain it.
NOTE CONF
But what's the what's the alternative.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So how do these cognitive capabilities evolve even if we
don't assume they are innate?
NOTE CONF
And how are they transmitted from one generation to the
next.
NOTE CONF
So the assumption there is then that they are culturally
transmitted, right?
NOTE CONF
Language is obviously learned from one generation to the next.
Parents talk with their children.
NOTE CONF
The children then talk to their children and so on
and so on and so forth.
NOTE CONF
So cultural evolution offers an additional or alternative mechanism for
transmitting cognitive capabilities.
NOTE CONF
And this is what Hayes calls cognitive gadgets or cognitive
technologies.
NOTE CONF
And these can be representations.
So for example I don't know kinship system is can
NOTE CONF
be represented as a tree or as a graph.
A food chain is obviously a sequential structure.
NOTE CONF
So it can be representations like this maps for example.
But they can also be capabilities.
NOTE CONF
Navigation language.
Numeracy.
NOTE CONF
So the ability to count and to estimate quantities.
So in her world all of this is acquired through
NOTE CONF
a general learning mechanism and is transmitted through cultural transmission
from one generation to the next.
NOTE CONF
Rather than being hardwired in our DNA so it's not
innate.
NOTE CONF
Of course, you have to assume some innate stuff, right?
For example, this general learning mechanism, whatever it is, has
NOTE CONF
to be innate.
Otherwise things wouldn't work.
NOTE CONF
And so how does the cultural transmission happen?
Through interaction and communication.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You interact with your peers.
NOTE CONF
You interact with your parents.
And so you acquire all this stuff.
NOTE CONF
And then the question is language itself.
Is that a cognitive technology as well.
NOTE CONF
And this is something we'll discuss in more detail throughout
the course.
NOTE CONF
Um, probably it has aspects that are innate and aspects
that are not.
NOTE CONF
Language is special because it's the vehicle of a lot
of cultural transmission.
NOTE CONF
Right?
We transmit things by speaking, by writing it up and
NOTE CONF
so on.
So this is just a diagram that illustrates that a
NOTE CONF
little bit.
So cognitive technologies would be things like this is supposed
NOTE CONF
to be a kinship hierarchy.
This is supposed to be a representation of, you know,
NOTE CONF
solar system and motions of of of planets.
This is supposed to represent navigation, which is a cognitive
NOTE CONF
skill.
This is supposed to represent the, uh, a food chain
NOTE CONF
and understanding of how food chains work.
So the sun and then there's grass, and then there's
NOTE CONF
an insect and and the toad and so on.
Um, and then at the centre of all of this
NOTE CONF
is language.
And language, of course, allows us to express all of
NOTE CONF
this, right?
Maps can be explained in language.
NOTE CONF
Concepts like time can be explained in language.
Numbers and reasoning with numbers.
NOTE CONF
And of course we can also write it down and
transmit it, even if it's not direct from person to
NOTE CONF
person or from parent to child and so on.
So language in some sense is at the centre of
NOTE CONF
this.
And all these ideas about cultural transmission of cognitive technology
NOTE CONF
wouldn't work without language, communication, interaction and so on.
So this is trying to illustrate this.
NOTE CONF
Here's our child.
The child here is an utterance like three koalas.
NOTE CONF
But at the same time of course they they see
the koalas most of the time.
NOTE CONF
And that way they construct these representations that we talked
about.
NOTE CONF
And the cognitive technologies ultimately are the representations that are
being built up.
NOTE CONF
And they construct them.
And then hopefully at some point they can utilise them.
NOTE CONF
And this is just a quote to to sort of
summarise what I've said.
NOTE CONF
So humans have created technology, physical machines, right?
We know this of course.
NOTE CONF
And the cognitive gadgets are the mental equivalent of this.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Are structures and processes and so on that we've we've
acquired over many generations of cultural evolution.
NOTE CONF
That's that's Hay's claim at least.
And, um, they basically extend our mind, just like tools
NOTE CONF
extend what our body can, can do.
And she calls them gadgets to distinguish them from instinct.
NOTE CONF
Instincts is what people have called them so far and
transmitted through cultural evolution rather than genetic evolution.
NOTE CONF
Biological evolution.
And this also it makes an important prediction, and one
NOTE CONF
that hasn't been tested yet, that people can adapt their
cognitive functions fairly easily.
NOTE CONF
Right.
If you assume it's all innate, it's all in the
NOTE CONF
DNA.
It was all fixed 100,000 years ago.
NOTE CONF
Then we have trouble adapting to a changing environment, right?
And there's obviously new stuff coming out all the time.
NOTE CONF
Smartphones, internet, ChatGPT and so on.
If you take the traditional evolutionary view, then it should
NOTE CONF
be really hard for us to adapt to this.
But under Hayes's view, with the way it's culturally transmitted,
NOTE CONF
it is fairly easy for new cognitive skills to emerge
and then pass down from one generation to the next.
NOTE CONF
Right.
They don't have to be encoded in the DNA.
NOTE CONF
And the process might look something like this.
So the the adults here, they have a certain counting
NOTE CONF
procedure that allows them to say three koalas.
The child initially doesn't share this counting procedure, but then
NOTE CONF
ultimately through the interaction is able to basically reconstruct.
This is just a little bit of code here, but
NOTE CONF
whatever it looks.
It looks like in the brain they're able to reconstruct
NOTE CONF
this way.
So the cognitive technology would be the representations and processes.
NOTE CONF
Cognitive artefact would be the linguistic signal.
So here I'm saying three koalas.
NOTE CONF
And then the environment is there's the teacher.
And we can also see the three koalas.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And then we're interacting with the environment.
NOTE CONF
This would not work with speech alone.
Without any visual input.
NOTE CONF
Without any interaction presumably.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Short quiz on cognitive technology.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So choose your cognitive technology.
Here is a number of candidates.
NOTE CONF
And are you supposed to just tap on on the
ones that you think are our cognitive technologies numbers are
NOTE CONF
the cognitive technology, language time, reading and writing and so
on.
NOTE CONF
And so forth.
You know.
NOTE CONF
I think.
This is this.
NOTE CONF
Is.
Okay, let's have a quick look.
NOTE CONF
Numbers.
Definitely cognitive technology.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And most people wouldn't think that numbers are innate.
NOTE CONF
So that's something that we acquire.
We acquire the number system.
NOTE CONF
Language um, would be a bit less clear.
Probably some aspects of language are innate.
NOTE CONF
Um.
You can see this, for example, by the fact that
NOTE CONF
we are the only species that has has language.
So something must have happened in our brains to enable
NOTE CONF
that.
But the truth is, we don't know for sure.
NOTE CONF
Time.
That's a good question.
NOTE CONF
So again, if you look at other species, some animals
have a notion of time.
NOTE CONF
So possibly that's innate as well.
But it could also be a cultural technology.
NOTE CONF
Reading and writing.
Definitely cultural technology.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It's too young.
NOTE CONF
As I've said.
It's too young to be innate.
NOTE CONF
So it has to be cultural transmission.
Kinship terms probably also cultural technology because of the differences
NOTE CONF
between languages.
Sorry, between cultures.
NOTE CONF
In what kind of whether you have a special word
for, I don't know, the uncle of your uncle and
NOTE CONF
so on.
Food chains?
NOTE CONF
I'm not sure.
Could be.
NOTE CONF
Probably.
Cognitive technology.
NOTE CONF
Trees?
No, but if you have a theory of trees.
NOTE CONF
I don't know how the different trees belong together.
Which ones are descended from each other, which ones are
NOTE CONF
edible, and so on.
Then maybe that becomes a cognitive technology.
NOTE CONF
Mountains?
No, but maybe a method for navigating them would be
NOTE CONF
cognitive technology.
Heliocentric model of the universe cannot be named, right?
NOTE CONF
So it must be a cognitive technology.
Maps also very likely, though some navigation skills might be
NOTE CONF
innate.
Koalas.
NOTE CONF
Again, this was a distractor.
Great.
NOTE CONF
And can you think of other cognitive technologies.
So let's see.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Just briefly.
NOTE CONF
We're almost out of time.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You can just write whatever you can think of and
I will show it as a close.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I guess, but there are more tools.
Maths.
NOTE CONF
Definitely cooking.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
And, uh.
NOTE CONF
Whaling.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
These are all great examples.
What's your.
NOTE CONF
Sense of rhythm?
could be innate.
NOTE CONF
Some kids, some animals have a sense of rhythm.
Logic.
NOTE CONF
Hunting.
Art.
NOTE CONF
Great examples.
We have to move on because we're almost out of
NOTE CONF
time.
So talking a little bit about language.
NOTE CONF
So that's sort of the million dollar question.
Is language also a cognitive technology which would present us
NOTE CONF
with a bit of a problem because language is obviously
also the vehicle for cultural transmission.
NOTE CONF
And here is of course the the Orthodox claim no
language is innate, right.
NOTE CONF
Language has remarkable complexity.
It is not specifically designed to accomplish a task.
NOTE CONF
So.
That is basically why animals don't have language, because they
NOTE CONF
don't have the innate capability and it's Um.
Doesn't require specific training.
NOTE CONF
I mean, kids don't speak from the beginning, but they
definitely speak before they enter school and learn to write
NOTE CONF
and other cultural skills.
So here it's the assumption that this is innate.
NOTE CONF
That's the only way to explain it.
That's sort of the orthodox view.
NOTE CONF
However, this is not sort of an armchair question, but
it's an empirical question, of course.
NOTE CONF
So we could look at genetic and neuroscientific evidence.
And Hayes in her in her article talks about this
NOTE CONF
a little bit.
People have until recently thought they had found a language
NOTE CONF
gene, a specific gene that if it's knocked out, you're
not able to acquire language, at least not fully.
NOTE CONF
However, there is now evidence that this gene does other
things as well, so we're not sure.
NOTE CONF
Animal communication.
You can teach chimpanzees and bonobos to some extent to
NOTE CONF
communicate.
They cannot speak, but they can sign.
NOTE CONF
Can teach some sign language to some extent.
Maybe that's an argument against Chomsky's claim.
NOTE CONF
Uh, of course there are some things that are universal
across languages.
NOTE CONF
All languages have verbs, for example, but other things that
are different.
NOTE CONF
And in general, we have 6000 languages in the world
and they can really be quite diverse.
NOTE CONF
So that would be an argument against innate.
That's probably.
NOTE CONF
And one argument that we will quickly look at is
critical periods.
NOTE CONF
So for quite a lot of cognitive functions there's a
period during which it needs to be acquired.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise it goes away.
You're no longer able to acquire that function.
NOTE CONF
So for example, um, the visual system needs to be
exposed to visual stimuli very early on.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise it doesn't develop properly.
And you can test this in animals.
NOTE CONF
So it's language like that as well.
Does it have a critical period and there is pretty
NOTE CONF
good evidence for that.
Um, child versus adult language learning works quite differently, right?
NOTE CONF
Children learn the language automatically, whereas adults have to study
them in a classroom.
NOTE CONF
Uh, non-native speakers versus native speakers.
They sound different.
NOTE CONF
They make mistakes.
If they're non-native speakers, they have an accent.
NOTE CONF
The age of immigration to a new country often determines
whether you end up as a native speaker or not,
NOTE CONF
and so on.
Uh, if you arrive before six, generally you end up
NOTE CONF
as a native speaker.
If you arrive after puberty, generally no longer.
NOTE CONF
Then there's evidence from feral children and so on, and
I won't have time to go into that.
NOTE CONF
But here's an interesting diagram from a relatively recent study
where the authors, um, gave speakers of English a test.
NOTE CONF
This is a grammatical test that basically gives you a
bunch of sentences and asks you, are these sentences correct
NOTE CONF
or not?
and then counted the accuracy here on the y axis
NOTE CONF
is the accuracy on this test.
M here in red are the native speakers of English
NOTE CONF
as the mother tongue.
And here on the y axis is the age.
NOTE CONF
So as you can see from the age of 1215,
something like that, they use they get maximum performance on
NOTE CONF
the test.
And only in the native speakers show that.
NOTE CONF
However, people who start learning the language at the age
of two, at the age of five, at the age
NOTE CONF
of eight, and so on, they get very close to
native performance and then older age of onset started learning
NOTE CONF
English at 11.
At 1417 you are less and less close.
NOTE CONF
And then if you start as an adult, 17, 23,
29 and so on, then you don't reach native performance
NOTE CONF
anymore.
So that seems to be indicating that there is a
NOTE CONF
critical period and is actually a bit longer than people
have previously thought.
NOTE CONF
It's maybe until the age of 11 or 14 or
something like that.
NOTE CONF
Then, as I said, there is also evidence from language
deprivation.
NOTE CONF
So this is children who were deprived of language input.
And it's obviously very heartbreaking, but also very interesting from
NOTE CONF
a linguistic point of view.
So Jeannie is a is a famous example who was
NOTE CONF
basically abused by her father and tied to a chair
until she was rescued at 13 and she knew only
NOTE CONF
a few words.
And then, of course, the linguists try to see is
NOTE CONF
she able to learn language after 13?
And the answer is really the.
NOTE CONF
She learned quite a lot of words, but she didn't
really learn sentence structure.
NOTE CONF
She didn't learn syntax.
It's hard to interpret these case studies because there is,
NOTE CONF
of course, deprivation.
There is other mental faculties that are affected.
NOTE CONF
It's not just language.
And it's hard to, uh, to generalise, but anecdotally at
NOTE CONF
least, that would be evidence for a critical period as
well.
NOTE CONF
And so the existence of the critical period.
Why is that interesting?
NOTE CONF
It's interesting because it indicates that language may be innate,
or aspects of language at least may be innate.
NOTE CONF
If you want to find out more about geni.
Here's a link that has explanations, videos, all sorts of
NOTE CONF
things.
Okay, we're out of time.
NOTE CONF
Here's a graphical summary of the of the lecture.
Any questions before I let you go?
NOTE CONF
Yes, please.
You can also come to me after class.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.